hello I'm serl vaner it's good to have
you with us this is the newsour live
from Doha coming up in the program this
hour American universities rocked by
protests against Israel's war on Gaza
they've also triggered demonstrations
beyond the United States spanning France
the UK and
Australia I'm Kristen salumi at columia
University where student demonstrators
have refused the administration's latest
offer to try to get them to leave the
campus an aid worker with the Belgian
development agency has been killed by an
Israeli air strike in
Gaza and a sanitation and Water Crisis
on the streets of Gaza we will be
reporting on how diseases are spreading
amid fears of
chera also Ukraine issues restrictions
on passports for military aged men
outside the country to address a
shortage of troops at
home and in sport the tennis world
number three Carlos alcarez has made a
winning start to his clay courtt season
the Spaniard who's been suffering with
injury put on a dominant performance and
his quest for a record third consecutive
Madrid Open
[Applause]
[Music]
title so we begin this hour with the
voices of students from across the world
University protests that were triggered
by the war on Gaza now growing going
into a chorus of disenchantment with
governments and Leadership across the
globe it's been a little over a week
since students at Columbia University in
New York began demanding that their
school divest from Israel students at
Colombia Harvard Georgetown MIT and
George Washington University Then
followed suit and protests spread from
the Northeast to campuses in Michigan
Texas and California and now they've
gone Global at University College London
in Paris at CPO University and all the
way to the University of Sydney in
Australia where we're going to try and
bring you voices from those campuses in
the US we are live in New York in Los
Angeles in Washington and in Texas let's
start with alzer's Kristen salumi at
Columbia University the epicenter of
this campus protest movement Kristen you
have been speaking with representatives
of the student body they are negotiating
with the university leadership about
their encampment about their demands
what's happening
that's right it is day 10 of this
demonstration it's a beautiful Friday
afternoon here in New York and you can
see I'm right alongside of the
encampment where all of the tents are
set up the negotiations are ongoing uh
but so is the sense of camaraderie and
spirit in the camp uh over here where
they are uh vowing to stay until their
demands are met the students are praying
on campus now there's a Muslim uh
evening prayer happening right now as
I'm talking to you and in a couple hours
time there will be a Shabbat Jewish uh
dinner this evening as well the students
say there is growing camaraderie amongst
the group and it's very um welcoming and
not hostile not anti-semitic they're
trying very hard to fight
these accusations and they say for
anyone who makes that accusation they
should come and see what's happening
here but getting to those all important
negotiations the students told me that
they spent 11 hours with the
administration yesterday another hour
here this morning there's um some
possibility that those discussions will
continue over the weekend there is no
looming deadline at this point they have
not been given a deadline to leave or
face eviction uh however they haven't
been promised that that won't happen
either so there is a little bit of
uncertainty a little unsettled uh
feeling among the protesters here they
don't know what's going to happen on
that front the university did make some
concessions or some offers I should say
to the students saying that they uh they
would uh agree to uh look at divestments
that are being made by the university
and start the process of reviewing them
and talking about them with the students
but the students said that's not good
enough they want a commitment to divest
from Israel not just a promise to look
at it before they leave the encampment
all Kristen thank you so much I'm going
to go now to Heidi Jo Castro Heidi's at
the University of Texas in Austin Heidi
I believe you have a guest with you this
hour just before we go uh to that to
that interview though you've been
explaining that the president of the
University where you are has really
flip-flopped on how to deal with these
protests
why that's right Jay Hartzel the
president of the University of Texas in
Austin he was taking a lot of blame
after the images we saw from the first
day of these protests and which police
had some violent confrontations with the
student demonstrators ultimately
arresting 57 people almost all of them
have had their charges dropped and after
the outcry that came not only from
protesters but even from some supporters
of the University well harzel released a
new message last night to the UT
Community saying that it was a difficult
intense stay saying that he believed at
the time that this protest would follow
what he said was the the national
Playbook unclear exactly what that meant
but apparently acknowledging that there
was no violence but that the police
believed there would be and then we saw
those conflicts taking place and now he
says he is quote grateful that that
these peaceful protests at the UT Austin
campus are continuing of course I want
to know what the people here are
thinking about that that does bring in
our guest this is Dr Basu uh vasu D so
so much thanks to you for joining us
thank you for having me as a faculty
member why is it important you to come
here and what do you make of the
president's statements you know it's
interesting because I think the
president um is making it sound now as
if uh it is the campus's Free Speech
policies that are allowing these
protests to continue when in reality
these protests have been nothing but
peaceful they have been nothing but a
spontaneous and organized expression of
conversation of people's feelings about
what's happening at a time when the
university is fully repressing any
conversation about Palestine faculty are
scared to mention the word Palestine in
their classes people don't want to talk
about the genocide and there has been
strong indication from the University
throughout since October 7th that this
is not a topic of conversation despite
the formal notices and emails you know
occasionally in response to events that
seem to claim that the university
supports free speech so I'm not at all
surprised by hearts's comments but I
would say in on one level they're a
bold-faced liee and on another level
it's kind of cowardly honestly because
there was no indication there was no
need to call police that day at all and
there was nothing leading up to to that
would suggest that what you're seeing
happening today as you can tell it's a
community space it's collaborative
people have been praying
eating um learning learning about the
law learning about what it means to be
students and exercising Free Speech
there have been art spaces I did a class
this morning the same as I would in one
of my seminars and it's a beautiful
space and this is exactly the program
actually from two days ago so I was
asked to teach two days ago and this is
what it was supposed to be like and very
quickly we've heard from Pro from
protesters saying that they still want
the central message of this protest to
be about the people of Gaza and the
resistance to Israel's war there talk
about how that message is you're trying
to ring that through absolutely we I'm
part of the Austin Texas faculty and
staff for justice in Palestine we are an
ad hoc Coalition of Faculty who support
the Palestine solidarity committee the
students who are the leaders and
Visionaries in the school who are really
Shifting the conversation and holding
the school down creating this space
where it's possible to even have these
conversations and you know I mean I
think for us as faculty we have a
commitment we have an obligation and as
people as humans who are living through
a genocide this is no war this is a
genocide it is very clear and it is
clear from Scholars of genocide it is
clear from human rights law that across
every measure of what constitutes a
genocide and ecocide and it's colas
acide a killing of all universities of
Faculty of knowledge production that is
what is happening and and it is Our
obligation as Scholars this is what we
do I do this day in and day out and it's
my job to teach about this thank you Dr
vas and those are the words that are
being shared here are really
conversations in fact there are some
Israeli supporters who have also come to
dialogue with these Pro Palestinian
supporters here on the University of
Texas Austin campus we're seeing a
peaceful protest going forth and they
say this is really in defiance of the
crackdowns and the unwarranted claim of
anti-Semitism that the university
leadership has tried to stick to these
protesters zero all right Heidi thank
you very much we're going to take it
back to the east coast Alan fiser is at
George Washington University in
Washington DC Alan I wonder what you're
seeing how the how George Washington uh
University is dealing with the student
protests there and also whether they're
engaging with the substance of the
protest on any level which is Israel's
war on Gaza
what has happened here is that the
protesters who were in the the the
college yard many of them are still
there but the numbers are down
significantly but there's still a tented
encampment there but there's a large
protest in the street just outside the
college yard as you can see here there
was about a couple of hours ago maybe
about 100 people here that number has
now swollen over the last couple of
hours to close on 300 and they're having
people speak and give their own views of
what is happening in Gaza uh joining me
live here now is uh hanar badi who is an
activist who's someone who has been
involved in protests outside Anthony
blinken's house the Secretary of State
here why are you here what what brought
you to this because you have protested
outside the Israeli Embassy outside Tony
blinken's house why is this so special
to you I think the power of encampments
and the power of consistent endurance
and protest is extremely important we
are at a very critical moment in
Shifting the public opinion in the
United States holding accountable
institutions that enable and support and
whitewash Israel's crimes and crimes
against humanity and also showing the
world that we are no longer afraid we
are no longer afraid to step into our
advocacy into the power of the
resistance and saying enough of the
inhumanity enough of the violations of
international law we've had encampments
now in front of blink's home today is
day 93 of our encampment in front of the
home of the US Secretary of State and we
are at day 60 of our 247 encampment also
in front of the Israeli Embassy and we
are so proud to have been joined by so
many students many of whom are currently
camping in this yard uh right here that
have been with us from the beginning and
we are here to show solidarity we are
here to support the students movements
it is extremely powerful when students
start to step up and say we are no
longer afraid to risk our careers we are
not afraid to speak the truth and we are
going to put apply put into applications
everything that we're learning about in
textbooks that the schools somehow are
so afraid of them to do and and that's
why people go to school they go to
school to learn critical thinking to
learn how to hopefully make the world a
better place and the fact that it's
being stopped is ludicrous and a lot of
the critic iism has been that that
you're cranks you're you're representing
a minority view that you're
troublemakers that you're anti-semitic
not that we've seen much evidence of any
of that here but do you genuinely feel a
shift in American public opinion driven
by the young people I definitely feel a
shift we've been on the streets now uh
you know as a collective group for 10
today is 87 days um and when we started
we were getting a lot more vile
commentary a lot of of just disgusting
rhetoric being called terrorists racists
rapists I have been called so many
things been spit on been slapped um and
what we're seeing now is more and more
people saying I wish I knew more your
presence your persistence people being
on the streets is encouraging us to
learn we want to know why you are so
enraged and why you feel so passionately
to put your lives on pause to do this
full-time and that's making people
curious it makes people want to go and
learn more about what's happening the
calls of you know people being
anti-semitic I have not been in a single
protest where people have been uh saying
things that are anti-semitic I think the
dehumanization of the Palestinian people
the dehumanization of activism the
dehumanization of people calling for
justice and freedom for all needs to end
and needs to stop and we are hoping that
you know we will continue to put
pressure to end that by showing Who We
Are by showing the true faces of peace
and love and Justice and the fight for
Freedom you've been a human human rights
activist for a long time do you see any
parallels here with 68 with the you know
the protests that that helped Drive the
end of the Vietnam War or even the 1980s
were there were protest against the par
in South Africa absolutely I I think
what we're seeing now is the endurance
of the movement we are seeing you know
they waited for us to tire out we are
currently in the epicenter of what is
enabling and supporting Israel's crimes
the United States of America
specifically Washington DC and so many
people that occupy the buildings all
around us are benefiting and have been
benefiting financially economically
socially politically from their support
and endorsement of Israel's crimes uh
and atrocities over the last 76 years
and I think what we're seeing now is
that people are saying we're no longer
willing to accept it we're no longer
willing for that to be the status quo
and the norm um and we're seeing a huge
shift in public opinion of of people
actually saying that I'm not afraid to
be called an anti-semite because I know
I am not one I know I am not one and
that shift is happening um and it's very
important specifically in places like
Washington DC where you know the city
pulls people that are interested in
policy the city pulls people that are
interested in human rights that are
interested in philanthropy and the
various institutions that unfortunately
we are seeing are way too dominated by
Zionist ideologies that do not humanize
Palestinians and our fight for freedom
and Justice our fight is not one that
should be controversial and we see in
Vietnam and you see you know for from
all these other protest movements it's
when the masses start to stop allowing
the dehumanization of our causes when we
start to own our power and step into it
when we start to say that we are willing
to sacrifice our security our freedom
our um you know Comfort to say enough
this needs to end enough that's when the
S starts to change because then you
start to have endurance I know for a
fact they were waiting for us to tire
out I know for a fact we've heard that
repeatedly from Secret Service during
our protest oh I'm sure you guys will be
gone next week oh I'm sure three weeks
we sat through the snow through the rain
through the hail through the wind
through the flooding through it all and
we're not going anywhere I know you're
incredibly busy I appreciate you taking
the time to speak this live